---
title: Why I'm No Longer Taking Donations
author: Oskar Wickstr√∂m
date: December 29, 2018
---

[Haskell at Work](https://haskell-at-work.com/), the screencast
focused on Haskell in practice, is approaching its one year
birthday. Today, I decided to stop taking donations through Patreon
due to the negative stress I've been experiencing.

## The Beginning

This journey started in January 2018. Having a wave of inspiration
after watching some of [Gary Bernhardt's new
videos](https://www.destroyallsoftware.com/screencasts), I decided to
try making my own videos about practical Haskell programming. Not only
producing high-quality content, but with high video and audio quality,
was the goal. _Haskell at Work_ was born, and the first video was
surprisingly well-received by followers on Twitter.

With the subsequent episodes being published in rapid succession, a
follower base on YouTube grew quickly. A thousand or so followers
might not be exceptional for a programming screencast channel on
YouTube, but to me this was exciting and unexpected. To be honest,
Haskell is not exactly a mainstream programming language.

Early on, encouraged by some followers, and being eager to develop the
concept, I decided to set up Patreon as a way of people to donate to
Haskell at Work. Much like the follower count, the number of patrons
and their monthly donations grew rapidly, beyond any hopes I had.

## Fatigue Kicks In

The majority of screencasts were published between January and
May. Then came the summer and my month-long vacation, in which I
attended ZuriHac and spent three weeks in Bali with my wife and
friends. Also, I had started getting side-tracked by my project to
build a [screencast video editor in
Haskell](https://wickstrom.tech/programming/2018/10/26/writing-a-screencast-video-editor-in-haskell.html). Working
on Komposition also spawned the Haskell package
[gi-gtk-declarative](https://owickstrom.github.io/gi-gtk-declarative/),
and my focus got swept away from screencasts. In all fairness, I'm not
great at consistently doing _one_ thing for an extended period. My
creativity and energy comes in bursts, and it may not strike where and
when I hope. Maybe this can be managed or controlled somehow, but I
don't know how.

With the lower publishing pace over the summer, a vicious circle of
anxiety and low productivity grew. I had thoughts about shutting down
the Patreon back then, but decided to instead pause it for a few
months.

## Regaining Energy

By October, I had recovered some energy. I got very good feedback and
lots of encouragement from people at [Haskell
eXchange](https://skillsmatter.com/conferences/10237-haskell-exchange-2018),
and decided to throw myself back into the game. I published one
screencast in November, but something was still there nagging me. I
felt pressure and guilt. That I had not delivered on the promise
given.

By this time, the Patreon donations had covered my recording equipment
expenses, hosting costs over the year, and a few programming books I
bought. The donations were still coming in, however, at around $160
per month, with me producing no obvious value for the patrons. The
guilt was still there, even stronger than before.

I'm certain that this is all in my head. I do not blame any supporter
for these feelings. You have all been great! With all the words of
caution you hear about [not reading the
comments](https://twitter.com/avoidcomments), having a YouTube channel
filled with positive feedback, and almost exclusively thumbs-up
ratings, I'm beyond thankful for the support I have received.

## Trying Something Else

After Christmas this year, I had planned to record and publish a new
screencast. Various personal events got in the way, though, and I had
very little time to spend on working with it, resulting in the same
kind of stress. I took a step back and thought about it carefully, and
I've realized that money is not a good driver for the free material
and open-source code work that I do, and that it's time for a change.

I want to make screencasts because I love doing it, and I will do so
when I have time and energy.

From the remaining funds in my PayPal account, I have allocated enough
to keep the domain name and hosting costs covered for another year,
and I have donated the remaining amount (USD 450) to
[Haskell.org](https://wiki.haskell.org/Donate_to_Haskell.org).

Please keep giving me feedback and suggestions for future
episodes. Your ideas are great! I'm looking forward to making more
Haskell at Work videos in the future, and I'm toying around with ideas
on how to bring in guests, and possibly trying out new formats. Stay
tuned, and thank you all for your support!
